---
permalink: /
title: "About me"
excerpt: "About me"
author_profile: true
redirect_from: 
  - /about/
  - /about.html
---

I am a postdoc in the Warwick Astronomy and Astrophysics group. I am currently
working with Pier-Emmanuel Tremblay on white dwarfs in the Gaia survey.

------

# Research Interests

I am primarily concerned with the study of white dwarfs. This type of stellar
remnant represents the end-state for the 95%+ of main-sequence stars with
masses below 8 Solar-masses, which will not undergo a core-collapse supernova.
Instead, while in the giant-star phase of evolution, the outer 50% of the star
will be ejected in an intense stellar wind. The remaining 50%, no longer
producing pressure via nuclear fusion in the stellar interior, is unable to
contend with the intense gravitational forces. The core thus collapses until
the quantum-phenomenon known as electron-degeneracy pressure can balance
gravity. The result is a hot (100000 K), immensely dense, Earth-sized object --
the white dwarf.

The interior of a typical white dwarf is mostly (99%) a mix of carbon-oxygen
ions in a sea of degenerate electrons. Around this, is an envelope of helium
(about 1% of the mass), and usually, a final shroud of hydrogen (0.01% of the
mass). Our telescopes of course can only directly see the outer-most layers and
what they're made of. Therefore the interior composition is constrained from
our theoretical understanding of how stars evolve, but also from observations
of pulsating white dwarfs where waves travelling through the interior make it
to the surface, providing information on the density of the central
carbon-oxygen core.

Because white dwarfs do not fuse-nuclei in their cores, they instead radiate
away their internal energy, at first cooling rapidly, and then much more slowly
the temperature of the white dwarf outer layers decrease. The oldest white
dwarfs known to the Milky Way can have cooled from an initial 100000 K to a
relatively cool 3000 K (only half the temperature at the surface of the Sun).
Because the processes that affect white dwarf cooling rates are fairly well
understood, the coolest (and thus oldest) white dwarfs provide firm constraints
on the age of the Galactic disk.

##White Dwarfs in Gaia
The Gaia satellite, placed in 2013, has been precisely measuring the positions
of about 1 billion stars. In particular it measures the stellar parallax, the
effect of stellar positions subtly changing as the satellite orbits the Sun (in
tandem with the Earth). The stars nearest the Solar System have the largest
parallaxes, and so this provides the most accurate way to measure distances to
our nearest stellar neighbours. Thanks to Gaia Data Release 2 (DR2) in April
2018, the parallaxes of one billion stars are now publically available, for
which about 260000 are for white dwarfs. This has increased the number of known
white dwarfs almost ten-fold, and allows us to learn about these objects in
entirely new ways. One of our major new results, which would have previously
been impossible, is the confirmation of crystallisation of the carbon+oxygen
ions in white dwarf interiors (see select publications below). Thanks to Gaia,
great strides are being made in many areas of astronomy, and so it is an
exciting time to be studying white dwarfs.

##White dwarf planetary systems
The transition from the main-sequence to the white dwarf stage should only
destroy the very inner-most part of their planetary-systems, and so white
dwarfs should continue to be orbited by planets for many Gyr after their
formation. We now see direct evidence for these planetary systems resulting
from the disintegration of asteroids (and occasionally comets) which venture
too close to the white dwarf. Once within about a Solar-radius of the white
dwarf, gravitational tides, can shred an asteroid into dust, forming a debris
disk which slowly accretes onto the white dwarf surface. These disks -- heated
by the nearby degenerate star -- can be detected via their emission of
infra-red flux. The chemical elements that make up the asteroids that have
fallen onto the central star can also be detected, as they temporarily alter
the composition of the white dwarf outer layers. Measuring the relative amounts
of these elements (e.g. O, Si, Al, Mg, Ca, Fe, Ni), means we can directly
determine the composition of extraSolar asteroids -- the building blocks from
which exoplanets are formed.

##Magnetic white dwarfs
For around 20% of white dwarfs, a magnetic field can be detected. These range
from a few kiloGauss (few 0.1 Tesla) all the way up to 1 GigaGauss (100000
Tesla). How these fields are formed is still a matter of debate with
suggestions of Fossil-fields from the main-sequence, dynamo generation during
the giant star phases, dynamo generation in the disks of accreting white
dwarfs, or though the process of interior crystallisation (or maybe some
combination of several of these). Magnetic fields can detected either through
circular polarisation of light from the white dwarf, or (more commonly these
days), via the Zeeman effect that typically causes spectral lines to be split
into three closely spaced lines, where the degree of the splitting corresponds
to the field strength. The most magnetic white dwarfs known, have fields that
cannot be generated in an Earth-based lab and so provide a unique way to learn
about how atoms behave when subjected to extreme magnetism.

##Survivors of white dwarf binary interactions
Unlike objects in our day-to-day lives, white dwarfs become physically smaller
as they become more massive. This leads to a limit known as the
Chandrasekhar-Mass (1.4 Solar Masses), at which point the electron-degeneracy
pressure can no longer support the mass of the star, and so runaway nuclear
fusion occurs resulting in the explosion of the white dwarf as a supernova
called a type Ia. For this kind of supernova to occur a white dwarf must grow
in mass until it reaches the Chandrasekhar-limit. This is possible for white
dwarfs who have a close binary companion star. Either the white dwarf pulls
material from a "normal" star, slowly growing its mass, or two white dwarfs can
merge forming an new white dwarf that exceeds the Chandrasekhar-Mass which
undergoes rapid collapse.

Recently a new subclass of type Ia supernovae has been identified called type
Iax. The Iaxs are much less luminous than normal type Ia supernovae, suggesting
that the white dwarf does not fully explode leaving behind some intact fragment
of the former star, which is then ejected from the binary star system. In 2017
an usual white dwarf called GD492/LP40-365 has been identified which fits the
description of a surviving remnant from a type Iax supernova. GD492 moves
through the Milky Way so fast that it is essentially being flung out of the
Galaxy. Furthermore it has a truly remarkable surface composition -- instead of
the usual hydrogen or helium atmosphere typical of white dwarfs, these elements
are entirely absent, and instead a unique atmosphere dominated by oxygen, neon,
and magnesium is seen, with traces of heavier elements all the way up to
nickel. The set of elements and their abundances are signatures of nuclear
burning of carbon, oxygen, and silicon. Stars like GD492 therefore provide a
novel way to study a nearby objects and connecting them to supernovae seen
distant Galaxies.


